(document is work-in-progress)

# ELECTION DAY vote integrity

This document proposes a form of paper ballot and election-day computerized voting integrity techniques. These techniques are designed to facilitate ease of voting in a secure, transparent, and auditable way.

## Terms used

When discussing a hash, this is a computer generated code that is difficult to reproduce without the original data.  When describing the content of a hash, there's visible and non-visible components, like a secret key. The non-visible components of the content of a hash will be represented within square brackets: `visible-text[secret].hash`. 

We use sha256 for hashing.

## VOTING MACHINES

We generally assume voting machines are computerized, where the VOTER is able to use a screen or input device to select choices. 

A paper-ballot based system, where VOTER stamps, colors dots, or hole punches specific areas of paper, is slightly different, and covered in a separate section: [#Paper Ballots]

The VOTER then saves or submits the vote choices into a computerized process. We intend to guarantee the end-to-end integrity from this process forward. 

We assume the voting machines are generating hard output using existing commercial quality thermal or laser printers.  The hard output is a VOTER-RECEIPT that is the basis of the integrity process.

## ELECTION DAY Prestart

- All SECURE-BALLOT-BOXES used must be time stamped when opened/constructed or used.
- Can be timestamped when placed into a voting machine.
- Can be post-dated to actual election opening
- If paper ballots are used, every paper ballot printed needs a time-based-serial number stamped on the ballet. See paper-ballots section.

## Election Day Voting Process

1. A VOTER walks up to an election machine.  Makes voting choices.
2. VOTER hits PRINT and VOTING-MACHINE generates a VOTER-RECEIPT with a QR code that contains CHOICES + hash of the choices.
3. VOTER-RECEIPT is printed for VOTER to retrieve. It has a prominent QR code. It has Time-based-Serial+hash and Election-Branch-Hash printed as well.
4. VOTER now has IN HAND a VOTER-RECEIPT that contains a printed QR code. 
5. VOTER is able to take his smart phone and scan the QR code, which will contain the shortened versions of things they voted for.  
6. VOTER now needs to present that VOTER-RECEIPT to an actual VOTER-RECEIPT-SCANNER.  
7. VOTER places his VOTER-RECEIPT into a scanner. Scanner is designed so VOTER is able to always see VOTER-RECEIPT physically.
8. VOTER is presented with his choices. VOTER confirms choices.
9. SCANNER now generates two codes: Critical-Vote-Hash and Election-Source-Hash and imprints them on the VOTER-RECEIPT.
10. SCANNER records votes into its database.
11. VOTER-RECEIPT is now PHYSICALLY PHOTOCOPIED 2 TIMES. One copy is then dropped into a SECURE-BALLOT-BOX within the machine.
12. Original VOTER-RECEIPT is returned to voter. VOTER is also presented with 1 copy of VOTER-RECEIPT. VOTER now has original VOTER-RECEIPT and two visibly identical copies of VOTER-RECEIPT. Hold copies up to a light source to verify QR code copy validity if desired.
13. VOTER is directed to deposit EACH of the VOTER-RECEIPT-COPY into two separate SECURE-BALLOT-BOX.

## ELECTION DAY CONCLUSION

(Also when a particular SECURE-BALLOT-BOX is filled and unable to accept additional VOTER-RECEIPT-COPY's)

1. SECURE-BALLOT-BOX gets sealed. Time duration the ballot box was opened 

## ELECTION HQ Post Election Day RECOUNT 

Scenario: Recount is demanded due to threshold. Higher authority demands PHYSICAL COPY RECOUNT.

*DO NOT ASSUME ANY OF THE VOTER-RECEIPT-COPY CONTAINED WITHIN SECURE-BALLOT-BOX ARE VALID.*

1. SECURE-BALLOT-BOX id and timestamp is NOTATED.
2. SECURE-BALLOT-BOX is opened and all VOTER-RECEIPT-COPY contained within are retrieved.
3. SECURE-BALLOT-BOX id and timestamp MUST BE PREREQUISIT to scanning *ANY* VOTER-RECEIPT-COPY
4. All VOTER-RECEIPT-COPY within each box is rescanned. INTEGRITY of QR code is validated with internal recorded sha1 hash.
5. INTEGRITY of VOTER-RECEIPT-COPY is validated with Election-Branch-Info hash.
6. EXAMINE count of VOTER-RECEIPT-COPY within SECURE-BALLOT-BOX id. EXAMINE timestamp and duration SECURE-BALLOT-BOX was open. LOOK FOR UNLIKELY COUNTS. Human voters would average around 30s - 1min to 
(more to come)

### Critical-Vote-Hash generation

The user is presented with his vote choices after the second machine has scanned QR code containing them. QR code validity is checked here... ie is-readable, hash matches choices, etc.

Next, a critical-vote-hash is constructed, composed of the following:
- "VOTING-CHOICES-HASH" ... contained within the QR code.  A sha1 hash of the voting choices.
- "TIME-BASED-SERIAL" ... A time-based serial number (similar to MongoDB ObjectId) is generated. This TIME-BASED-SERIAL enables detecting a FLOOD of machine generated ballots (most likely not generated by humans voting but by a machine).
- "Election-Branch-Details" ... Plain english details of the election branch.
- "Secret-Key" ... A secret key appended to the special string, used for helping integrity of the generated critical-vote-hash.


### QR code generation on VOTER-RECEIPT

This QR code should be a near literal copy of choices. (QR Codes have certain data limits, so care should be taken...).  

>>> The Hard Physical Ceiling: ~500 to 800 Characters
>>> If you are building an application that must function offline without external links—like an offline vCard (contact card), a Wi-Fi configuration payload, or a local encrypted token—the absolute practical ceiling is around 500 to 800 characters.

>>> The QR standard has a highly optimized "Alphanumeric" mode, but it only supports uppercase letters, numbers, and a tiny handful of symbols ($ % * + - . / : and space)

Thermal reactive might not be best choice here but its acceptable.

The idea is that any common QR code scanner can see exactly whats written in the QR code.  `1:WASH.G/ADAMS.J` for George Washington for President with John Adams vice-president on the first line of the ballot.

Due to Alphanumeric optimizations present in QR codes, we cant encode LF so space can be used instead, and use all uppercase letters. Regex `/[A-Z0-9\$\%\*\+\-\.\/\: ]/ `

Voting choices, Recommend using YEA/NAY for yes no. Recommend three dashes --- for NO VOTE or just strip that line index entirely for space efficiency.

```
1:WASH.G/ADAMS.J 2:YEA 3:NAY 4:--- 5:NAY
or
1:WASH.G/ADAMS.J 2:YEA 3:NAY 5:NAY
```

Important to stay within QR code data limits.

Next, run a sha1sum on the choices. Strip any trailing whitespace: 
```
> echo "1:WASH.G/ADAMS,J 2:YEA 3:NAY 4:--- 5:NAY" | sha1sum
0a91f7e39c70f2c98853e605fd116b9d96aed4a3 *-
```

### Critical-Vote-Hash generation

When the VOTER sees and confirms his voting choices, we are now in the critical-vote-hash generation stage. It is to be IMPRINTED on the VOTER-RECEIPT for the VOTER to be able to walk out with. VOTER can later use this VOTER-RECEIPT to verify his vote counted properly.

An in-place photocopy of the VOTER-RECEIPT with the TIME-BASED-SERIAL and a hash of the both plus more critical info outlined below is printed directly on the VOTER-RECEIPTfor the VOTER to then deposit into a SECURE ELECTION BOX.

1. We concatenate, with "." as a delimiter, the "time-based serial", and the "election-branch-details".
2. These are PRINTED on the VOTER-RECEIPT in physical view to the VOTER by an imprinting (dot matrix) or thermal imaging printer. 

## Paper Ballots

When using Paper ballots, it is imperative for serial numbers with a hashed `Batch_ID.hash` and `Batch_ID + Time-based-serial.hash` be printed or stamped onto each paper ballot. Doing so makes it difficult to manufacture ballots illegitimately.

Paper ballots now can only be sourced from legit branch offices.

### Paper Ballot undersupply

There's a scenario where Election officials might need to employ an outside print vendor, ie Kinko's, Staple's etc, to quickly print up ballots. There's a relatively good solution for that scenario: ballots need to be duplicated and fast. The answer is the same... just generate a new Batch_ID per 1000 ballots, and imprint the above mentioned code+tag on the batch of ballets. 

This scenario carries a little more risk, however the `Batch_ID. Time-based-serial.secret-hash` still helps create a chokepoint for illegitimate ballot reproduction.

